Introduce package downloading feature to dotnet (#14495)
NuGet/Home: accepted/2025/dotnet-package-install.md

# Dotnet Package Install Command

* Author: [Nigusu](https://github.com/Nigusu-Allehu)
* GitHub Issues: [#12513](https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/12513), [#14491](https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/14491)

## Summary

> This document proposes adding a `dotnet package install` command to the .NET CLI.

Reviewer: This document needs to answer one very important question:

> What does it _actually mean_ to install packages in a non-project context?

Is this literally just "download package X, version Y to the local package cache?"

Once installed, how is someone expected to interact with the package - is there a way for tools to request the path to the 'root' of the package in some structured way?

If the goal is to prepopulate caches, how will you handle multiple packages/multiple versions of packages? Multiple args? Would you accept some kind of manifest file to use as input? If so, how would users _create_ such a file?

Reviewer 2: @baronfel my memory is that System.CommandLine treats all arguments starting with an `@` as a "response file", no opt out is even possible.  So, if a customer creates a file packages.txt where they list one package per line, will `dotnet package install @packages.txt` automatically give them the equivilent of `dotnet package install pkg1 pkg2 pkg3`?

Reviewer 3: I agree. 

I'd say download the nupkg and potentially extract it. Don't lean to strongly about what the default should be.
It seems like an extracted version should be it, but don't know for sure.

Author: Discussed offline
Summary
* The command will be a simple command that downloads a package to CWD unless specified otherwise
* Multiple versions will be handled similar to how multiple versions of the same package are stored in the GPF. ParentDirectory/PackageID/PackageVersion path will be used.
* For now, we won't support a specific manifest file but as @zivkan mentioned response file is also an option

> This document proposes adding a `dotnet package install` command to the .NET CLI.

Reviewer 2: Would `dotnet package download` feel more natural than install? 

If I install in a project directory, I might expect it to add it to the project. Or maybe install is used to install system tools, so should run an install script?

I think download makes it more clear that the command shouldn't do much more than download.

Reviewer 3: I agree, the global tool that I have I called `download package download` because of this exact reason. 

.NET tools can be installed on the machine, packages can be installed in a project and the gesture is package add.

> The command would bring parity with `nuget.exe install`, enabling package download and extraction scenarios without requiring a project file.

Reviewer 2: unless we're planning on having the new command have every feature that nuget.exe install does, I'd avoid the word parity.  Something along the lines "this command will prevent customers needing to use obtain nuget.exe  just for extracting packages without a project file"

## Motivation

Developers often need to download NuGet packages outside of a project context:

* Populating internal or offline feeds.
* Security scanning of packages.

> * CI/CD workflows that consume `.nupkg` artifacts directly.

Reviewer 2: A lot of customers are using nuget.exe install in CI scripts running on Linux and Mac, and therefore need to install mono just for it.  I think it's worthwhile calling out that this will allow customers to avoid needing mono once implemented.

Currently, the only way is either using `nuget.exe` or creating dummy projects with `dotnet restore`.

> A `dotnet package install` improves developer productivity.

Reviewer 4: Do we have links to GitHub issues or FeedbackTickets that we can add here?

Author: yes, the original issue is linked at the top of the page: https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/12513. Do we also have other GitHub issues or Feedback Tickets that we should add here?

## Explanation

### Functional explanation

The new command lives under `dotnet package`.

> `dotnet package` will then be the natural home for **search -> install -> add/remove** since it unifies all package-related workflows under one surface.

Reviewer 3: What are the exit codes?

0 - success
1 - fail.

What about when the package is already on disk? IMO just 0 is enough for now,, but it's worth explicitly clarifying since it's part of the UX.

Author: 0 - success
1- fail as you mentioned for now. Added in the doc

> Here is what `dotnet package` would look like

Reviewer 2: When we create specs for the new command, it's typical we provide a sample help output for the new command, not its parent command. IMO this is just making the spec longer 15-20 lines longer, and only 1 line has new information relevant to the spec, so it's information sparse.

```ps1
Description:

Usage:
  dotnet package [command] [options]

Options:
  -?, -h, --help  Show command line help.

Commands:
  search <SearchTerm>    Searches one or more package sources for packages that match a search term. If no sources are specified, all sources defined in the NuGet.Config are used.
  add <PACKAGE_ID>       Add a NuGet package reference to the project.
  install <PACKAGE_ID>   Install a NuGet package (and dependencies) to a folder, without modifying a project.
  list                   List all package references of the project or solution.
  remove <PACKAGE_NAME>  Remove a NuGet package reference from the project.
```

`dotnet package install <packageId> [options]`

> **Supported options:**

Reviewer 2: will any of these has single letter aliases? if so, what are they?  If a single letter is proposed for one of these options, but it's a letter that is commonly used by other commands, and it's used in a different context in this command, we might want to avoid that letter to reduce confusion.

Author: For now, just -s ource and -v erbosity

> **Supported options:**

Reviewer 2: I don't see a `--verbosity` option.   NuGet.Protocol's messages about GET, CACHED, OK, NOTFOUND, etc are spammy and not useful except when trying to investigate errors. Similar for when using a credential provider, its verbose output is only desirable when investigating auth failures.

Author: added

> * `--version <semver>`: A version (eg. 13.0.1).

Reviewer 2: `dotnet package add` started supporting the `packageid@version` syntax last year, I think. For `dotnet package update` it only supports that syntax, it has no `--version` option, in order to reduce confusion when multiple packages are provided in one CLI.

I think this new command should support multiple packages, and so should use the `id@version` syntax, and not have the `--version` option.

If omitted, the highest version is chosen from the available sources.
* `--source <package source>`: Specifies one or more package sources to install from.
When not specified the command searches all sources defined in hierarchical selected `NuGet.config` or passed via `--configfile`.
It can also be used to specify a package source key that is found in a config file.
* `--output-directory <path>`: Sets the directory where packages will be downloaded.
The default is the global packages folder.

> * `--exclude-version`: Omits version number from the package folder name.

Reviewer 2: extracting the package without a version should absolutely not be allowed in the global packages folder.

Reviewer 3: I understand the motivation behind the whole, change the version, don't change the script thing, but I've seen the usage of this feature cause so many discrepancies and uncertainties, because packages change their structure from version to version.

I think we should not add this.

Author: Discussed offline.
The command will now follow a similar extraction pattern to global packages folder and this option will not be supported
The command Stores each package in its **own folder named after the package ID**, with subfolders for each version.

Example:

```ps1
<output-directory>/
  Contoso/
    13.0.3/
    12.0.3/
```

> * `--prerelase`: Allows pre-release packages to be considered when resolving versions.

Reviewer 2: are customers going to understand what "resolving versions" means?  I think "when finding the latest version" is much more clear.

By default only stable versions are selected.
* `--framework <tfm>`: Specifies the target framework.
* `--download-only`: Downloads the `.nupkg` file to the output directory without extracting it.

> No dependencies are downloaded either.

Reviewer 2: Does this mean that when `--download-only` is not provided, dependencies are downloaded?   When a package has multiple dependencies groups (one per TFM), which TFM will the dependency be downloaded for?

If so, and I want to use this command to download a nupkg and its dependencies so I can immediately push it to a private feed, I will want the dependencies. Why does `--download-only` prevent downloading dependencies?

Author: Discussed offline. Now that we have simplified the command to download just the package a user specified, this option has been removed from the design

> * `--no-http-cache`: Prevents the usage of http cached packages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `--no-http-cache`: Refresh downloads of any packages already in the HTTP cache.
```

Reviewer 3: What other commands support --no-http-cache?

Is it all? Can we do without it for now?

Author: removed

> * `--direct-download`: download directly without populating any caches with metadata.

Reviewer 3: Which caches are we talking about here? 

direct download was added as a means to bypass the gpf. 

IMO dotnet package download should always bypass the GPF, effectively treat the output folder as the only output location. 
http cache should be used as normal.

Author: removed. The command will download to CWD by default unless specified by users to download to a different location. The packages won't be cached in GPF too.

* `--configfile <path>`: Used to specify a NuGet.Config file to use instead of the default configuration hierarchy.
* `--dependency-version <policy>`: Controls how versions of dependencies are selected when a version range is specified.

> Values: Lowest(default), HighestPatch, HighestMinor, and Highest.

Reviewer 2: Does nuget support configurable dependency version anywhere else?  Not in PackageReference.  Maybe in packages.config, but the .NET SDK only supports PackageReference, so it feels out of place to re-use the packages.config dependency resolver in the dotnet cli.  If the packages.config resolver doesn't have configurable version resolution, then this option will cause us to need to implement it in the PackageReference dependency resolver, or implement a new dependency resolver, both of which sound like a lot of work.

Also, I'm quite confident that `nuget.exe install` doesn't support downloading dependencies without a project file. Do we have customers asking for this?  It feels to me like something we can consider for a future improvement, but a first version can leave out.

Reviewer 3: nuget.exe instlal downloads the dependencies as well. 
tbh, I'm not sure this command should be downloading the dependencies at all.

That being said, the whole dependency version policy shouldn't apply IMO, at least not in V1. 

Let's make it minimal and then we can add functionality based on feedback and usage.

Author: removed. Will be added in the future if needed/requested

> * `--no-audit`: opts out of vulnerability auditing. Be default it is on.

Reviewer 2: What does auditing mean in the context of this command?

If a package has a known vulnerability, will the command prevent downloading/extracting the package? If so, how do customers accept the risk and allow it anyway?

If the command will only warn (some output message, but process exit code == 0), how can customers treat it as an error instead?  nuget.exe install is primarily used in scripts, not human interactive use, so I think it needs to be something easily scriptable.

Author: Updated based on offline discussion
By default, this command runs in **audit mode set to `warn`**.

* If a downloaded package is identified as vulnerable, a vulnerability message is written to **stderr**, but the exit code remains **0** (as long as the download itself was successful).
* `--audit off`: Disables vulnerability auditing.
* `--audit error`: Writes vulnerability messages to **stderr** and sets the exit code to **1** if any vulnerabilities are found.

> * `--allow-insecure-connections`: allows downloading from http sources(insecure).

Reviewer 3: My suggestion would be to avoid adding all of these options everywhere. 
There are ways to do it in the nuget.config and we'd respect that.

Author: Since this command will be used primarily in CI scenarios, I think having this option is critical. In cases where a dynamic source is required, relying on a `nuget.config` file can be cumbersome. For example, users encountered similar challenges with the `push` command, as noted in https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/14047.

### Technical explanation

The `NuGet.CommandLine.XPlat` project currently exposes `dotnet package search` and `dotnet package update` in `Program.cs`.
The upcoming `install` sub‑command fits naturally alongside these operations.

> ### Algorithm: `dotnet package install <packageId> [options]`

Reviewer 2: IMO, when a feature spec have very low technical complexity, it's ok to leave this section empty, or very minimal. This sounds like implementation details that I'll wait for the implementation pull request, so maybe I'm being lazy, but I'm not going to read in a feature spec.

Reviewer 3: Low technical complexity + no changes to existing files or anything like that. 
For example, if this was a project feature, and it was low technical complexity, but still assets file changes, I'd still want to see that in the spec. 

I agree in this case, we don't need this, imo it's just busy work for the author.

     * `--source <package source>`
     * `--output-directory <path>`
     * `--exclude-version`
     * `--prerelease`
     * `--framework <tfm>`
     * `--download-only`
     * `--no-http-cache`
     * `--direct-download`
     * `--configfile <path>`
     * `--dependency-version <policy>`
     * `--no-audit`
     * `--allow-insecure-connections`

1. **Load configuration**

   * If `--configfile` is provided, load settings from that file.
   * Otherwise, use the default `NuGet.Config` hierarchy.

1. **Resolve package sources**

   * If `--source` is specified, resolve those sources (it could be a url or a source key defined in a config file).
   * Else, use all enabled sources from settings.

1. **Http source usage check**

    * If any of the sources are HTTP but do not have`allowInsecureConnections` set to true, log an error and stop the command execution.

1. **Determine output directory**

   * If `--output-directory` is specified, use it.
   * Otherwise, default to the global packages folder.

1. **Configure folder layout**

   * If `--exclude-version` is set, package folders are named `<id>` only.
   * Otherwise, use `<id>.<version>` layout.

1. **Handle target framework**

>    * If `--framework` is provided, constrain resolution to that TFM.

Reviewer 5: When a package has different dependencies for different TFMs, does specifying `--framework` mean only the dependencies for that specific TFM are downloaded?

Author: This option has now been removed as we agree to make the command simple and only download the package a user specified without its dependencies
